
When an organization is small, it's bandwidth is narrow and as a result its focus must be narrow in order to be effective.  Culturally speaking, the leadership in such organization must provide guidance that narrows the focus and helps the company scale.

On the other hand, when an organization reaches considerable size – perhaps that of large company or medium sized country – its capacity broadens and its focus must broaden as well.  What is the role of leadership within an organization – – a community – – of this size?

A narrowness of focus, even on the ultimate mission, may provide guidance to the group, but in many cases the specialization that must go on within such large organizations will make such mission oriented guidance almost abstract thanks to its distant relationship from the day-to-day tasks of the people involved.  In other words, for the person in accounting the grand pronouncements about “making chihuahuas shiver no more!” or whatever the mission statement of the organization as a whole may be, provide little guidance for how to go about their day-to-day tasks.

In such a large organization, the more important guidance becomes not the specifics of “what” but the principles of “why” and "how."  At a basic level, the role of leadership whether formal or informal, is to help create clarity about social norms and identity. 

In order to resonate with the individuals within the organization, the values and social norms must feel appropriate.  However, they must also be distinct from the values of the larger community within which the organization resides.  In order to form the basis of “identity” and thus create coherence within the group, the values and norms must create a perceptible distinction between the way “this group behaves” and the way the rest of the world behaves.

What should those cultural norms look like in practice?  It depends in part on the context within which the organization is operating.  However, many people have given useful guidance over the years on the types of cultural practices that give a group an advantage.


